Getting my annual bloodwork is usually a disappointment because the standard panel is sadly lacking for helping with disease prevention, especially for diseases that are avoidable with healthy lifestyle behaviors. I like to request additional tests, whether they’re from my doctor or whether I order them myself online, and blood glucose measurements are the ones I’m most interested in. Here’s an overview of the important measurements, including strengths and limitations. But first:

#### What Even Is Glucose?

Glucose is a monosaccharide, which means it is the simplest possible form of carbohydrate and cannot be broken down into other carbohydrates. It’s also the primary carbohydrate source for the body’s energy. More complex carbohydrates are broken down into glucose, while other monosaccharides, like fructose and galactose, are converted into glucose via a series of pathways and reactions.

#### How Blood Glucose is Modulated

Blood glucose stability is important because levels that are too high or too low can both cause problems. When blood glucose increases after eating, a hormone called insulin is secreted by the pancreas to move that glucose from the blood into cells for energy. Otherwise, when fasting or when on a low carbohydrate diet, the liver picks up the slack by increasing gluconeogenesis, which converts proteins and other non-carbohydrate sources into glucose. With a shifting balance of insulin and gluconeogenesis, blood glucose can remain relatively stable at varying levels of carbohydrate intake. Therefore, an important point to understand about any glucose tests is they are not a measure of how much sugar one has consumed. Instead, they indicate how well the body is able to maintain this stability. Knowing this, we can properly evaluate what these tests are revealing.

#### Fasting Blood Glucose

At my age and health status, this is the only test that my doctor orders by default. I’ll cite the [Mayo Clinic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diabetes/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20371451) here:

> _A blood sample will be taken after you haven't eaten anything the night before (fast). A fasting blood sugar level less than 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) is normal. A fasting blood sugar level from 100 to 125 mg/dL (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) is considered prediabetes. If it's 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L) or higher on two separate tests, you have diabetes._

The idea is that under fasted conditions, there is an expected range that blood glucose should fall into. An elevated level indicates some combination of insulin resistance and improper gluconeogenesis. However, blood glucose taken at any given point in time can vary significantly. As a personal example, on a particularly stressful day, my fasting blood glucose was measured at 98 mg/dL, which is considered to be nearly prediabetic. Three days later, a second measurement yielded a modest 81 mg/dL. That experience was an interesting showcase of how mental stress evolutionarily acts as an anticipation of a physical threat, and the body adapts to mobilize energy accordingly. For this reason, although a high fasting blood glucose can raise a red flag, additional tests should be used for more clarity.

#### Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c)

This test measures a long-term average of blood glucose. Hemoglobin is a protein present in red blood cells, and the percentage given by this test represents how much of that hemoglobin has glucose attached to it. Hemoglobin in red blood cells is continuously exposed to glucose in the bloodstream, so higher blood glucose concentrations increase the likelihood of glycation (glucose binding to hemoglobin). Because red blood cells have an average lifespan of three months, the hemoglobin A1C test reflects the percentage of glycated hemoglobin over that time. The Mayo Clinic considers an HbA1c above 6.5% to be diabetic, between 5.7% and 6.4% to be prediabetic, and below 5.7% to be normal. My most recent HbA1c was 5.2%. However, lower does not necessarily mean better; HbA1c is primarily a tool to help identify one's current state of metabolic health, rather than a marker to keep as low as possible in the healthy range.

While HbA1c covers the pitfall of a fasting blood glucose measurement being an instantaneous measurement rather than an average, it's still a lagging indicator of metabolic problems for one simple reason: hyperinsulemia precedes hyperglycemia. In other words, in earlier stages of metabolic disease, more insulin is needed to transport glucose out of the blood, but blood glucose measurements can still remain normal.
