The funny thing about science is you can't actually prove anything. The best we can do is gather evidence, and hopefully that evidence is strong enough to support an argument beyond a reasonable doubt. Nutrition science in particular is tricky because of how much does _not_ have that kind of strong evidence. Even more troublesome is weak evidence is often presented as strong to support an agenda or sell a product. Recently, a growing number of nutrition enthusiasts have developed a fervor against the consumption of seed oils (typically marketed as "vegetable oils"). Some experts dismiss this concern, stating that evidence overwhelmingly supports the use of see oils as both safe and healthy. In the past, most of us would have no choice but to accept these expert opinions at face value. But, thanks to the beauty of the information age, we can access cutting-edge science with a few clicks from the comfort of our bedrooms. It's still not always easy to figure things out, but I did the research and wrote this post to make everything extremely simple. That way, you're guaranteed to walk away with a much better understanding of what's going on with seed oils.

#### The Theoretical Problem With Seed Oils

When asked about seed oils, internet personalities usually start talking too much and making things unnecessarily complicated. Complicated talking points means we depend on an allegiance to these self-proclaimed experts. Our dependency is great for their business, but bad for actual understanding. Succinctly answering the question "why are seed oils theoretically harmful" can be simplified into one simple word: oxidation. That means the high amount of polyunsaturated fats (PUFAs) in these oils can be oxidized (loss of an electron) through various means, like exposure to light, heat, or free radicals in the body. The oxidized fats can then steal electrons back from cells in the body, stabilizing the fats but damaging the cells. If you want a more formal scientific view of what happens, read about [lipid peroxidation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lipid_peroxidation).

Even with a well-established scientific process elucidated, implications aren't clear from theory alone. On one side of the spectrum, some argue that PUFAs from all sources should be minimized as much as possible because PUFAs are the types of fats most easily oxidized. To those people, consuming mostly saturated fats (SFAs) makes mechanistic sense. On the opposite extreme, others argue that research demonstrates clear benefits of PUFAs over SFAs, and SFAs should therefore be substituted with PUFAs as much as possible. They claim that harmfulness of junk foods, which almost always contain seed oils, is incidental and due to other factors. The overall controversy is due to people having opinions all over that spectrum, with the most extreme people on both sides getting the most attention due to the nature of social media. Now that we understand the spectrum of what is being argued, we can start looking at research.

#### Human Trials and Their Limitations

A good science experiment isolates a single variable and determines outcomes based on that variable. If we could recruit a large sample of genetically identical humans and keep them in the same environment for a long period of time, that would be great for research. But, for obvious ethical reasons, we cannot create an army of genetic clones and lock them in a lab for decades. Instead, scientists recruit as many people as financially feasible and practical as possible, with vaguely similar health backgrounds based on a few measurements. A lot of variability is still left on the table, no matter how much is controlled for. The result is that even if a human study has a clear significant outcome, nuances are usually unaccounted for, and a similar study might even result in a different outcome. Thus, cherry-picking individual studies to support one's own bias becomes very easy.

Going back to seed oils, the way many human trials involving seed oils are designed are not by substituting one entire dietary pattern with another, but by taking an existing dietary pattern and substituting external sources of fats. What that usually means is finding a bunch of participants and instructing them to substitute sources of SFA with sources of PUFA (usually seed oils). In other words, if participants were to spread butter on their bread or sour cream on their baked potato, they would instead be instructed to use a PUFA-rich spread or oil, like in [this study](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00125-001-0768-3). Or perhaps the researchers might provide them with some baked goods that contain a SFA-rich oil versus a PUFA-rich one, demonstrated [here](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24550191/). These types of studies usually favor seed oils fairly consistently. We might reach a premature conclusion that SFAs cause diabetes, fatty liver, and all kinds of bad stuff, while oils that did not exist for 99.97% of human history can save us from these terrible diseases. Perhaps if someone invents a time machine, we should instruct ancient hunter-gatherers to remove the fat from their meat and use our manufactured oil instead. Alternatively, let's explore more research to paint a clearer picture.

#### Cholesterol

The one avenue for which the evidence is so strong that it should be considered irrefutable at this point is that seed oils, rich in PUFAs, lower LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) when compared with sources of saturated fats (SFAs) typically found in red meat and dairy. This observation is often extrapolated with creative language claiming that PUFAs improve heart health and lipid markers. It's true that in a statistical vacuum, higher LDL cholesterol correlates with higher incidence of heart disease. But this vacuum ignores that LDL-C can rise for multiple reasons; some of which indicate metabolic problems, and others that are benign. That's why in order to assess overall cardiovascular risk, we don't look at LDL-C alone. Instead, we look at multiple markers to try and assess what's going on in body, and whether LDL-C is elevated for healthy or unhealthy reasons. So, focusing on a single parameter to dictate whether or not one should consume a particular food is extremely myopic. I'll do a deep dive on cholesterol and heart disease in the future, which is why if you're not already subscribed to these blog updates, you will benefit greatly by doing so right now at the bottom of this page.

https://med.stanford.edu/news/insights/2025/03/5-things-to-know-about-the-effects-of-seed-oils-on-health.html
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32087567/
https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.038908
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S092422441000261X

#### What Animal Studies Reveal
